---
layout: post
title: "Mind Wanders.. Finally"
date: 2017-12-1
---

Here’s what I’ve been thinking lately. It’s ironic - it’s that for the past couple of months, maybe a year, I’ve not really permitted myself the time or total freedom to just think. To let my mind wander. 

This by no means suggests that I’ve been mindlessly auto-piloting through existence. On the contrary, a majority of my life demands “thinking” in a traditional sense - a rigorous job, commitments and activities to juggle, moderate existential dread (ha, ha). However, the kind of thinking that’s been missing from my life is the kind that serves no deliberate purpose. 

Remember when you were a kid? Some days while playing outside, if you were adventurous and curious like I like to think I was, you’d set off in a random direction, for no reason other than to have an adventure. Some days you came back covered in mud and bruises, only one shoe left to your name. Other days you’d come back with a pet lizard you captured and a whole bunch of new friends from the neighborhood. Either way, you always learned, came back with stories, and expanded your knowledge of this big wide world, bit by bit. 

That’s where I’m getting at with this whole thinking thing. Don’t get me wrong, working professionally as a software engineer, growing and maturing and trying to be as thoughtful as I can about the future has without a doubt taught me many invaluable ways to think. I’ve been given all of these tools, yet the problem is that I’ve unconsciously conditioned myself to become practical in how I use them to a fault. Achieve the goals so we can achieve the more goals! 

Now - how did I get here? The immediate sequence of events reads like every millennial’s nightmare. 4 hour flight, Chicago to San Francisco. For whatever reason, the in-flight entertainment won’t work on my laptop, and the United mobile app is required to view content on my iPhone. I don’t feel like sleeping or listening to podcasts and I forgot to pack a book. Check. Mate. 

I sit there for 10 minutes staring straight into the back of the seat in front of me. It occurs to me that I feel like an idiot. It occurs to me that this would be a good opportunity to write something. After all, I’ve been thinking about getting into a consistent writing habit for ages. I love writing, don’t I? It occurs to me that this is longest period of time that I could remember going without some sort of stimulus. Pathetic right? In this day and age where we can have our most flippant entertainment desires fulfilled with the swipe of a finger, 10 minutes of empty boredom feel like torture. It’s no wonder I have trouble focusing on a consistent basis. Not focusing - doing the same thing for x amount of consecutive hours and deluding yourself into thinking you’re focusing. Focusing - capital “F” focus, meaning completely losing yourself in something, becoming blissfully oblivious to the rest of existence and emerging, spent but satisfied on the other side. But I digress. It occurs to me that I should think about something to write, it appears that the circumstances have aligned to force me out of what otherwise would be a lazy behavior loop. In any of the other multiverses, I’m watching “Guardians of the Galaxy Volume 2” right now. Movie probably sucks but I’d still enjoy myself. It occurs to me that this is the first time in a long time that I’ve allowed myself to be deadass bored. I’ve crossed the threshold where I’d normally instinctively reach for my phone or laptop to distract myself with probably useless and inconsequential drivel. I feel free and naked, yet strangely empowered. I have left the cave in the allegory. Momentum builds. I write. 

“Here’s what I’ve been thinking lately.” 

I wrote those words because I hypothesized (read as: prayed) that putting something down would unlock of stream of words untapped during my lack of mental wanderings. As it would turn out 670 words later, that reservoir is more of a geyser. 

Relating to my earlier point, technology has decimated the intimacy in our relationships, and in an even more clandestine and sinister way, decimated our intimacy with our own thoughts. On a completely unrelated note, I sometimes prioritize pretty prose over poignant points. But seriously, entire generation(s) are growing up viewing boredom as a nuisance to be overcome, rather than one of life’s greatest sandboxes (claimed the self aware millennial). 

This whole train of thought reminds me of a particular experience I had during my final semester of college. Coincidentally enough, this experience was an improv comedy class, in which our professor constantly urged us to “take the train of opportunity” - to discover one’s experiences from within and hitch yourself along from the ride, rather than attempting to awkwardly think and create or derive comedy from past knowledge. I sucked. I sucked a lot. And it was because I hadn’t/haven’t allowed my brain to wander enough. I didn’t want to discover my experiences. I was scared - the idea of not being in control, not having my thoughts directed for a specific purpose - was sickening. It’s why I’m not the greatest at freestyle rap either. It’s all an exercise in letting go of the reigns, and these knuckles aren’t white for nothing. 

Speaking of all this, it’s a little bit weird to me on a meta level. Here I am, stuck in a flying can, just going on an absolute tear about how I need to give my mind more freedom to roam. But who’s driving that conversation? Who’s putting the proverbial pen to paper? That’s right - Mr. Mind himself. That bastard.. knows what’s best for himself all along and yet doesn’t do it half of the time. I’ve always thought that you could experience a lot of success and happiness in life if you were able to master the ability to view, analyze, and speak to yourself as if advising a good friend, and then taking action on your own self-advice. 99% (gross overstatement) of the time, we know what we need to do. The devil’s in actually getting yourself to do it. Now there’ s book proposal in there somewhere. 

There’s one last thing I want to talk about before I top this baby off, 1,065 words down the road now. Woah look at me go. In relating to technology and the endless source of content and stimulus we now have, our society as it pertains to individuals has very much gone from production oriented to consumption oriented. What I mean by this is that most of us are constantly consuming stimulus - TV, podcasts, books, articles, tweets, instagram photos, snapchats, facebook feed items, etc.. and I would wager that only a small subset of us are producing things on a consistent basis - music, art, poetry, writing, hell, a lot of people these days don’t even cook their own food. 

There’s something inherently satisfying with producing. It’s much harder than consuming, at least for me. A good 20-30 minutes into it and my brain starts feeling like it’s melting, as if coated in a thin layer of lactic acid. It’s just like going to the gym. I can concretely feel how out of shape my brain is sometimes in that sense, as it’s become so accustomed to being inundated with distractions. If I break past that barrier though, as I have now, I’ll go on forever, the mind’s version of the runner’s high. 

Can’t really put my thumb on where the satisfaction from producing is derived from. Maybe it’s the human prerogative to leave something behind. Maybe all hunter-gatherers did all day besides finding food was composing poetry and writing songs. Maybe it’s just pure narcissism. Whatever it is, it feel damn good. I hope this becomes a habit. I can do more than just hope, I hope. A 1,331 word journey later, this brain is ready to go home and rest. Til the next time. 

Well would you look at that! The kid’s wandering again!
